Node Lifecycle Conditions Blog (#56267)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2026/node-lifecycle-conditions.md

Reviewer: We'll connect you with a blog _writing buddy_ who will help you align this to the guidance on the Kubernetes website about what to do.

> ---

Reviewer 2: Blog post for [KEP-5683](https://kep.k8s.io/5683): Node Lifecycle Conditions, Alpha in v1.37. Content accurately reflects the KEP — all technical claims verified. Main issues: missing `draft: true`, heading structure, `<!--more-->` excerpt marker, and documentation cross-links.

layout: blog

> title: "Introducing Node Lifecycle Conditions"

Reviewer 2: **Blocking**: Front matter must include `draft: true` per blog guidelines. The blog team changes it to `date: YYYY-MM-DD` before publication.

```suggestion
title: "Introducing Node Lifecycle Conditions"
draft: true
```

slug: node-lifecycle-conditions
author: >
  Ryan Hallisey (NVIDIA)
---

> # Building Lifecycle-Aware Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: **Blocking**: Two issues: (1) Blog posts must start with an untitled introductory paragraph immediately after front matter, not a heading. (2) `#` is reserved for the title from front matter; use `##` as the topmost heading level. Move this heading below the intro paragraph and demote it to `##`.

Kubernetes has many ways to describe what is happening on a Node. Readiness,
taints, Pod state, labels, annotations, and provider-specific APIs each expose
part of the picture. What has been missing is a shared, Kubernetes-owned way to

> say that a Node is draining, undergoing maintenance, or undergoing Graceful

Reviewer 2: Link Kubernetes concepts to their documentation at first mention (blog guideline: "Link to relevant documentation at the first mention of a Kubernetes concept or feature"). Key missing links:

- "Graceful Node Shutdown" → `/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/node-shutdown/`
- "draining" → `/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/safely-drain-node/`
- Node conditions (in the "Shared Node Lifecycle Signal" section) → `/docs/reference/node/node-status/#condition`

> Node Shutdown.

Reviewer 2: **Blocking**: Add `<!--more-->` after this intro paragraph to define the excerpt shown on the blog index page.

```suggestion
Node Shutdown.

<!--more-->
```

> Kubernetes v1.37 introduces five well-known Node conditions that provide that

Reviewer 2: is there a doc in dev-1.37 we can link from here or some other place?

Author: There is, but it hasn't merged yet - https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/56268

description:

- `DrainInProgress`
- `Drained`
- `MaintenancePlanned`
- `MaintenanceInProgress`
- `GracefulNodeShutdownInProgress`

> This is a first step in a [larger effort to enhance Node Lifecycle management](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5683).

Reviewer 2: Prefer `kep.k8s.io/<number>` short links over direct GitHub URLs when referencing KEPs.

```suggestion
This is a first step in a [larger effort to enhance Node Lifecycle management](https://kep.k8s.io/5683).
```

In this phase, the new conditions make lifecycle state observable but core Kubernetes
controllers do not act on them yet. They create a foundation that controllers,
cluster operators, and ecosystem tools can build on.

> ## Shared Node Lifecycle Signal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Shared node lifecycle signal
```

> Node lifecycle affects components across the cluster. The kubelet, Node

Reviewer 2: Two formatting issues: (1) `kubelet` should be in backticks (component name). (2) Per style guide, descriptive controller names use lowercase "controller" (like "Job controller", "DaemonSet controller"), so "Node Lifecycle Controller" → "node lifecycle controller".

```suggestion
Node lifecycle affects components across the cluster. The `kubelet`, node
```

> Lifecycle Controller, workload controllers, scheduler, autoscalers, storage

Reviewer 2: Continuation of lowercase "controller" fix.

```suggestion
lifecycle controller, workload controllers, scheduler, autoscalers, storage
```

is happening to a Node.

Today, each component has to reconstruct that understanding from indirect
signals. One controller might look at Node readiness, another at taints, and
another at Pods that are terminating or missing. Infrastructure providers and
operators often add their own labels or annotations.

Those signals remain useful for their intended purposes, but they do not answer
the same question. A taint can influence scheduling or eviction, for example,
but it does not attest that a drain is in progress or that an administrator's
drain criteria have been met. A `NotReady` Node does not explain whether the
cause is an unexpected failure, a graceful shutdown, or planned maintenance.

Without shared lifecycle context, independently correct components can make
conflicting decisions. A DaemonSet controller can replace a Pod that the
kubelet intentionally terminated during graceful shutdown. A Job controller can
wait indefinitely for a terminal Pod phase on a Node that an administrator is
removing. A storage operator might learn about maintenance only after drain has
already started.

The new conditions provide a stable place on the Node for that missing context.

> ## The New Node Lifecycle Conditions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The new Node lifecycle conditions
```

| `MaintenanceInProgress` | The Node is actively undergoing maintenance. |
| `GracefulNodeShutdownInProgress` | Graceful Node Shutdown is determined to be in progress on the Node. |

Maintenance can include hardware or software rollout, remediation,
decommissioning, or debugging. Whether maintenance requires a drain depends on
its impact. A Kubernetes upgrade usually should follow a drain, while a kernel
live patch might not need one.

Like other Node conditions, each lifecycle condition uses `status` to report
whether the observation is active:

- `True`: the lifecycle state is currently observed.
- `False`: the lifecycle state is not currently observed.
- `Unknown`: Kubernetes cannot determine whether the lifecycle state is active.

The `reason` provides a stable, machine-readable cause for the current status,
and `message` can provide additional human-readable detail.

For example, an authorized maintenance controller could publish:

```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - type: MaintenancePlanned
    status: "True"
    reason: MaintenanceWindow
    message: "Hardware maintenance is scheduled for this Node"
```

> ## What Changes in Kubernetes v1.37

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What changes in Kubernetes v1.37
```

The v1.37 release reserves these names as well-known `NodeConditionType`

> constants and introduces the alpha `NodeLifecycleConditions` feature gate,

Reviewer 2: Enhancement phases should use Start Case: Alpha, Beta, GA.

```suggestion
constants and introduces the Alpha `NodeLifecycleConditions` feature gate,
```

which is disabled by default.

For this release, an administrator or an administrator-authorized
controller is responsible for setting and clearing the lifecycle conditions.

Just as importantly, no core workload controller changes its behavior based on
these conditions in this first release. A condition set by an administrator is
an observable signal.

> ## The Foundation for Lifecycle-aware Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The foundation for lifecycle-aware Kubernetes
```

> The value of a shared signal comes from what can consume it - core controllers,

Reviewer 2: nit: The hyphen here reads as an em dash — consider using `—` instead.

```suggestion
The value of a shared signal comes from what can consume it — core controllers,
```

admins, or the ecosystem of lifecycle projects. Follow-up enhancements can build
on the conditions without every component inventing a different way to infer
Node lifecycle state.

Consider a long-standing DaemonSet rollout edge case. A Node that is broken or
undergoing maintenance can remain unavailable for reasons unrelated to the new
DaemonSet revision. That Node still consumes the rollout's availability budget,
which can slow or block the controller from progressing the rollout on healthy
Nodes.

The DaemonSet controller knows that a Pod is unavailable, but it cannot tell
whether the new revision failed or an administrator intentionally took the Node
out of service. Readiness, taints, and Pod state expose pieces of the situation,
but none provides authoritative maintenance context.

> `MaintenanceInProgress` creates a Kubernetes-owned place to publish that

Reviewer 2: When using a technical term (condition name) as a sentence subject, qualify what it is so blog readers do not have to recall the term's type from earlier context.

```suggestion
The `MaintenanceInProgress` condition creates a Kubernetes-owned place to publish that
```

context. Future work can define how the DaemonSet controller uses it for rollout
ordering, availability accounting, and status reporting. Those behaviors
still require careful design, but the goal is for admins to no longer

> have to manually address the issue.

Reviewer 2: "the issue" — name the thing being referred to. For example: "...no longer have to manually unblock the rollout" or similar.

> ## Future Expansions and Getting Involved

Reviewer 2: Sentence case for body headings.

```suggestion
## Future expansions and getting involved
```

Node lifecycle is a cross-cutting problem. Solving it starts with
components sharing enough context to make compatible decisions.
The next stage is to build on Node Lifecycle Conditions to improve scenarios
such as Graceful Node Shutdown, drain, and maintenance. Longer-term lifecycle
coordination may require explicit ownership, locking, and potentially a
dedicated API.

The Kubernetes ecosystem already includes many solutions for Node maintenance,
remediation, drain, autoscaling, and fleet management. The experience behind
those projects is essential to building a foundation that works across
different environments and operational models. We invite maintainers
and users to share their use cases and ideas to shape the future work.

> Follow the work through [Specialized Lifecycle Management](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5683)

Reviewer 2: Both links point to the same KEP — consolidate and use the `kep.k8s.io/5683` short link per style guidelines. For example:

```
Follow the work through [KEP-5683: Node Lifecycle Conditions](https://kep.k8s.io/5683).
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Node Lifecycle Conditions"
draft: true

> slug: node-lifecycle-conditions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
slug: node-lifecycle-conditions
author: Ryan Hallisey (NVIDIA)
```

---

> **Author:** Ryan Hallisey (NVIDIA)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

---
layout: blog
title: "Introducing Node Lifecycle Conditions"
slug: node-lifecycle-conditions
draft: true
author: >
  Ryan Hallisey (NVIDIA)
---

Kubernetes has many ways to describe what is happening on a Node. Readiness,
taints, Pod state, labels, annotations, and provider-specific APIs each expose
part of the picture. What has been missing is a shared, Kubernetes-owned way to
say that a Node is [draining](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/safely-drain-node/),
undergoing maintenance, or undergoing [Graceful Node Shutdown](/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/node-shutdown/).

Kubernetes v1.37 introduces five well-known [Node conditions](/docs/reference/node/node-status/#condition)
that provide that description:

> - `DrainInProgress`

Reviewer 2: Do you ned this list in intro paragraph?

Author: I liked it because it's part of the "hook".

Reviewer: I'm fine with this, and I co-edit our blog.

- `Drained`
- `MaintenancePlanned`
- `MaintenanceInProgress`
- `GracefulNodeShutdownInProgress`

<!--more-->

## Building lifecycle-aware Kubernetes

This is a first step in a [larger effort to enhance Node Lifecycle management](https://kep.k8s.io/5683).
In this phase, the new conditions make lifecycle state observable but core Kubernetes
controllers do not act on them yet. They create a foundation that controllers,
cluster operators, and ecosystem tools can build on.

> ## Shared node lifecycle signal

Reviewer 2: this is totally a nit. I made comment in opposite direction on previous iteration. More I think about it more I feel that the Node is a term that needs to start with upper case. Same as Pod. Here and a couple more cases below.

I am fine either way though.

Author: I'll with capital `N`, `Node`.  That's consistent with the title

| `Drained` | The Node has reached the drain criteria selected by the administrator. |
| `MaintenancePlanned` | The Node is expected to undergo a change in the future. |
| `MaintenanceInProgress` | The Node is actively undergoing maintenance. |
| `GracefulNodeShutdownInProgress` | Graceful Node Shutdown is determined to be in progress on the Node. |

Maintenance can include hardware or software rollout, remediation,
decommissioning, or debugging. Whether maintenance requires a drain depends on
its impact. A Kubernetes upgrade usually should follow a drain, while a kernel
live patch might not need one.

Like other Node conditions, each lifecycle condition uses `status` to report
whether the observation is active:

- `True`: the lifecycle state is currently observed.
- `False`: the lifecycle state is not currently observed.
- `Unknown`: Kubernetes cannot determine whether the lifecycle state is active.

The `reason` provides a stable, machine-readable cause for the current status,
and `message` can provide additional human-readable detail.

For example, an authorized maintenance controller could publish:

```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - type: MaintenancePlanned

>     status: "True"

Reviewer 4: nit: you could add a sample `lastTransitionTime` in the example

    reason: MaintenanceWindow
    message: "Hardware maintenance is scheduled for this Node"
```

## What changes in Kubernetes v1.37

The v1.37 release reserves these names as well-known `NodeConditionType`
constants and introduces the Alpha `NodeLifecycleConditions` feature gate,
which is disabled by default.

For this release, an administrator or an administrator-authorized
controller is responsible for setting and clearing the lifecycle conditions.

Just as importantly, no core workload controller changes its behavior based on
these conditions in this first release. A condition set by an administrator is

> an observable signal.

Reviewer 4: Could we reword this paragraph so it's easier to read? for eg.

```suggestion
In this first release, there are no core workload controller changes based on
these conditions in this first release. A condition set by an administrator is
just an observable signal.
```

decide which component owns each lifecycle condition to avoid conflicting writes.

## Why a shared signal matters

Node lifecycle affects components across the cluster. The `kubelet`, node
lifecycle controller, workload controllers, scheduler, autoscalers, storage
operators, and external maintenance systems all need some understanding of what
is happening to a Node.

Today, each component has to reconstruct that understanding from indirect
signals. One controller might look at Node readiness, another at taints, and
another at Pods that are terminating or missing. Infrastructure providers and
operators often add their own labels or annotations.

Those signals remain useful for their intended purposes, but they do not answer
the same question. A taint can influence scheduling or eviction, for example,
but it does not attest that a drain is in progress or that an administrator's
drain criteria have been met. A `NotReady` Node does not explain whether the
cause is an unexpected failure, a graceful shutdown, or planned maintenance.

Without shared lifecycle context, independently correct components can make
conflicting decisions. A DaemonSet controller can replace a Pod that the

> kubelet intentionally terminated during graceful shutdown. A Job controller can

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`kubelet` intentionally terminated during graceful shutdown. A Job controller can
```

out of service. Readiness, taints, and Pod state expose pieces of the situation,
but none provides authoritative maintenance context.

The `MaintenanceInProgress` condition creates a Kubernetes-owned place to publish
that context. Future work can define how the DaemonSet controller uses it for
rollout ordering, availability accounting, and status reporting. Those behaviors
still require careful design, but the goal is for administrators to no longer
have to manually adjust the rollout.

## Future expansions and getting involved

Node lifecycle is a cross-cutting problem. Solving it starts with
components sharing enough context to make compatible decisions.
The next stage is to build on Node Lifecycle Conditions to improve scenarios
such as Graceful Node Shutdown, drain, and maintenance. Longer-term lifecycle
coordination may require explicit ownership, locking, and potentially a
dedicated API.

The Kubernetes ecosystem already includes many solutions for Node maintenance,
remediation, drain, autoscaling, and fleet management. The experience behind
those projects is essential to building a foundation that works across

> different environments and operational models. We invite maintainers

Reviewer 4: Instead of `we`, replace it with the SIGs/WG that is inviting maintainers or end-users to contribute to this effort

and users to share their use cases and ideas to shape the future work.

Follow the work through [KEP-5683: Node Lifecycle Conditions](https://kep.k8s.io/5683).

> To participate, join the [Node Lifecycle Working Group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/wg-node-lifecycle) or SIG Node and SIG Apps discussions.

Reviewer 2: In other review I saw @lmktfy yesterday was suggesting to use a new beautiful page https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/wg/node-lifecycle/ for such links.

Author: Done

> To participate, join the [Node Lifecycle Working Group](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/wg/node-lifecycle/) or [SIG Node](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/node/) and [SIG Apps](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/apps/) discussions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To participate on our discussions, join one of our groups:

- [Node Lifecycle Working Group](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/wg/node-lifecycle/)
- [SIG Node](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/node/)
- [SIG Apps](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/apps/).
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Introducing Node Lifecycle Conditions"

> slug: node-lifecycle-conditions

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes v1.37: Introducing Node Lifecycle Conditions"
slug: kubernetes-v1-37-node-lifecycle-conditions
```

| `Drained` | The Node has reached the drain criteria selected by the administrator. |
| `MaintenancePlanned` | The Node is expected to undergo a change in the future. |
| `MaintenanceInProgress` | The Node is actively undergoing maintenance. |
| `GracefulNodeShutdownInProgress` | Graceful Node Shutdown is determined to be in progress on the Node. |

Maintenance can include hardware or software rollout, remediation,
decommissioning, or debugging. Whether maintenance requires a drain depends on
its impact. A Kubernetes upgrade usually should follow a drain, while a kernel
live patch might not need one.

Like other Node conditions, each lifecycle condition uses `status` to report
whether the observation is active:

- `True`: the lifecycle state is currently observed.
- `False`: the lifecycle state is not currently observed.
- `Unknown`: Kubernetes cannot determine whether the lifecycle state is active.

The `reason` provides a stable, machine-readable cause for the current status,
and `message` can provide additional human-readable detail.

For example, an authorized maintenance controller could publish:

```yaml

> status:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Node .status excerpt
status:
```

  conditions:
  - type: MaintenancePlanned
    status: "True"
    reason: MaintenanceWindow
    lastTransitionTime: "2026-08-05T12:00:00Z"
    message: "Hardware maintenance is scheduled for this Node"
```

## What changes in Kubernetes v1.37

The v1.37 release reserves these names as well-known `NodeConditionType`
constants and introduces the Alpha `NodeLifecycleConditions` feature gate,

> which is disabled by default.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The v1.37 release reserves these names as well-known `NodeConditionType`
constants and introduces the Alpha `NodeLifecycleConditions` feature gate,
which is disabled by default. The gate does not restrict who can set these
conditions today; it exists so that future built-in behavior that consumes
them can be opted into.
```

## Future expansions and getting involved

Node lifecycle is a cross-cutting problem. Solving it starts with
components sharing enough context to make compatible decisions.
The next stage is to build on Node Lifecycle Conditions to improve scenarios
such as Graceful Node Shutdown, drain, and maintenance. Longer-term lifecycle
coordination may require explicit ownership, locking, and potentially a
dedicated API.

The Kubernetes ecosystem already includes many solutions for Node maintenance,
remediation, drain, autoscaling, and fleet management. The experience behind
those projects is essential to building a foundation that works across
different environments and operational models. The Node Lifecycle Working Group,
SIG Node, and SIG Apps invite maintainers and users to share their use cases
and ideas to shape the future work.

Follow the work through [KEP-5683: Node Lifecycle Conditions](https://kep.k8s.io/5683).
To participate on our discussions, join one of our groups:

- [Node Lifecycle Working Group](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/wg/node-lifecycle/)
- [SIG Node](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/node/)

> - [SIG Apps](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/apps/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [SIG Apps](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/apps/)
```

| `MaintenancePlanned` | The Node is expected to undergo a change in the future. |
| `MaintenanceInProgress` | The Node is actively undergoing maintenance. |
| `GracefulNodeShutdownInProgress` | Graceful Node Shutdown is determined to be in progress on the Node. |

Maintenance can include hardware or software rollout, remediation,
decommissioning, or debugging. Whether maintenance requires a drain depends on
its impact. A Kubernetes upgrade usually should follow a drain, while a kernel
live patch might not need one.

Like other Node conditions, each lifecycle condition uses `status` to report
whether the observation is active:

- `True`: the lifecycle state is currently observed.
- `False`: the lifecycle state is not currently observed.
- `Unknown`: Kubernetes cannot determine whether the lifecycle state is active.

The `reason` provides a stable, machine-readable cause for the current status,
and `message` can provide additional human-readable detail.

For example, an authorized maintenance controller could publish:

```yaml
# Node .status excerpt
status:
  conditions:
  - type: MaintenancePlanned
    status: "True"
    reason: MaintenanceWindow

>     lastTransitionTime: "2026-08-05T12:00:00Z"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    lastTransitionTime: "2026-12-09T12:00:00Z"
```

    message: "Hardware maintenance is scheduled for this Node"
```

## What changes in Kubernetes v1.37

The v1.37 release reserves these names as well-known `NodeConditionType`
constants and introduces the Alpha `NodeLifecycleConditions` feature gate,
which is disabled by default. The gate does not restrict who can set these
conditions today; it exists so that future built-in behavior that consumes

> them can be opted into.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The v1.37 release reserves these names as well-known `NodeConditionType`
constants and introduces the Alpha `NodeLifecycleConditions` feature gate,
which is disabled by default. In v1.37 the gate is effectively a no-op: it does
not restrict who can set these conditions, and no component reads them. It
exists so that the built-in behavior planned for future releases — controllers
that consume these conditions — can be opted into when it arrives. You do not
need to enable it to start publishing the conditions today.
```

For this release, an administrator or an administrator-authorized
controller is responsible for setting and clearing the lifecycle conditions.

In this first release, no core workload controller changes its behavior based

> on these conditions. A condition set by an administrator is an observable

Reviewer 5: > A condition set by an administrator is an observable signal

This sentence feels a bit disconnected or incomplete.  I would either delete it, or connect it to the previous sentence: "... these conditions, but an administrator can set conditions to communicate maintenance and drains to cluster users".

signal.

## How to use lifecycle conditions today

The immediate value is operational clarity. Administrators and
lifecycle automation can use these conditions as a common status channel for
Node lifecycle work that already happens today.

For example, maintenance automation can set `MaintenancePlanned` when a future
maintenance window is scheduled, then set `MaintenanceInProgress` when work
starts. Drain automation can set `DrainInProgress` when it begins evicting Pods
and `Drained` when the administrator's selected drain criteria have been met.
The `GracefulNodeShutdownInProgress` condition can report that Graceful Node
Shutdown is in progress on the Node.

> The recommended pattern is to use lifecycle conditions as status. Continue to

Reviewer 5: "as status" feels a little too terse.  I think the intended meaning is "don't try to use these conditions to *drive* maintenance or drains, but just use the conditions to report the status of maintenance and drains that are managed elsewhere.

rollout ordering, availability accounting, and status reporting. Those behaviors
still require careful design, but the goal is for administrators to no longer
have to manually adjust the rollout.

## Future expansions and getting involved

Node lifecycle is a cross-cutting problem. Solving it starts with
components sharing enough context to make compatible decisions.
The next stage is to build on Node Lifecycle Conditions to improve scenarios
such as Graceful Node Shutdown, drain, and maintenance. Longer-term lifecycle
coordination may require explicit ownership, locking, and potentially a
dedicated API.

The Kubernetes ecosystem already includes many solutions for Node maintenance,
remediation, drain, autoscaling, and fleet management. The experience behind
those projects is essential to building a foundation that works across
different environments and operational models. The Node Lifecycle Working Group,
SIG Node, and SIG Apps invite maintainers and users to share their use cases
and ideas to shape the future work.

Follow the work through [KEP-5683: Node Lifecycle Conditions](https://kep.k8s.io/5683).

> To participate on our discussions, join one of our groups:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To participate in our discussions, join one of our groups:
```

existing Kubernetes mechanisms such as [`kubectl cordon`](/docs/reference/kubectl/generated/kubectl_cordon/),
[`kubectl drain`](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/safely-drain-node/),
[taints](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/taint-and-toleration/), and
workload-specific controls to change scheduling or eviction behavior. Use
lifecycle conditions to make the state of that work visible to people,
dashboards, alerts, and automation that choose to consume the signal.

When setting a condition, use `True` while the lifecycle state is active. Set the
condition to `False`, or remove it, when the state is no longer active. Use a
stable `reason` value and a clear `message` so that both people and automation
can understand why the condition changed. Cluster administrators should also
decide which component owns each lifecycle condition to avoid conflicting writes.

## Why a shared signal matters

Node lifecycle affects components across the cluster. The `kubelet`, node
lifecycle controller, workload controllers, scheduler, autoscalers, storage
operators, and external maintenance systems all need some understanding of what
is happening to a Node.

> Today, each component has to reconstruct that understanding from indirect

Reviewer: Do you mean "today, now these conditions are defined" or "today, some weeks before the release"?

The article will be published **after** v1.37 has been released.

Author: Today would mean "Prior to the k8s 1.37 release".  I'll make this more specific.

signals. One controller might look at Node readiness, another at taints, and
another at Pods that are terminating or missing. Infrastructure providers and
operators often add their own labels or annotations.

Those signals remain useful for their intended purposes, but they do not answer
the same question. A taint can influence scheduling or eviction, for example,
but it does not attest that a drain is in progress or that an administrator's
drain criteria have been met. A `NotReady` Node does not explain whether the
cause is an unexpected failure, a graceful shutdown, or planned maintenance.

Without shared lifecycle context, independently correct components can make
conflicting decisions. A DaemonSet controller can replace a Pod that the
`kubelet` intentionally terminated during graceful shutdown. A Job controller can
wait indefinitely for a terminal Pod phase on a Node that an administrator is
removing. A storage operator might learn about maintenance only after drain has
already started.

The new conditions provide a stable place on the Node for that missing context,
as part of the

> [larger effort to enhance Node Lifecycle management](https://kep.k8s.io/5683).

Reviewer: nit: I would hyperlink to https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/5683/ - it is more approachable, I think.

undergoing maintenance can remain unavailable for reasons unrelated to the new
DaemonSet revision. That Node still consumes the rollout's availability budget,
which can slow or block the controller from progressing the rollout on healthy
Nodes.

The DaemonSet controller knows that a Pod is unavailable, but it cannot tell
whether the new revision failed or an administrator intentionally took the Node
out of service. Readiness, taints, and Pod state expose pieces of the situation,
but none provides authoritative maintenance context.

The `MaintenanceInProgress` condition creates a Kubernetes-owned place to publish
that context. Future work can define how the DaemonSet controller uses it for
rollout ordering, availability accounting, and status reporting. Those behaviors
still require careful design, but the goal is for administrators to no longer
have to manually adjust the rollout.

## Future expansions and getting involved

Node lifecycle is a cross-cutting problem. Solving it starts with
components sharing enough context to make compatible decisions.
The next stage is to build on Node Lifecycle Conditions to improve scenarios

> such as Graceful Node Shutdown, drain, and maintenance. Longer-term lifecycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as _graceful node shutdown_, drain, and maintenance. Longer-term lifecycle
```
